Description:

This project analyzes data from a targeted search in the ProQuest 
Historical Newspapers database. The project performs analyses to 
ascertain newspaper article frequency, term frequency, change over 
time, and article sentiment/polarity.


Note on Data Collection

The ProQuest search was performed with the following search parameters:
  - search term: kitchenette
   - filter by:
     - Publication Date: 1940-1959
     - Publication: "Chicago Daily Tribune (1923-1963)" OR 
	"New York Times (1923-Current file)" OR 
	"Los Angeles Times (1923-Current File)" OR 
	"The Chicago Defender (National edition)(1921-1967)" OR 
	"The Washington Post (1923-1954)" OR 
	"Daily Defender (Daily Edition)(1956-1960)" OR 
	"The Washington Post and Times Herald (1954-1959)"
     - Document Type: "Feature" OR "Front Page/Cover Story" OR
	"Letter to the Editor" OR "News"
  - Yields: 1425 results
  - Sorted by: Relevance (default)
 First 500 results selected to export for analysis.


Dependencies:
  1. RStudio, Version 0.99.903


Files:

 Data
    1. kitchenette1_proquest.csv: ProQuest dataset (results 1-100)
    2. kitchenette2_proquest.csv: ProQuest dataset (results 101-200)
    3. ktichenette3_proquest.csv: ProQuest dataset (results 201-300)
    4. kitchenette4_proquest.csv: ProQuest dataset (results 301-400)
    5. kitchenette5_proquest.csv: ProQuest dataset (results 401-500)
    6. analysis-dataset-kitchenette_proquest.csv: The final Analysis 
	Dataset derived from the raw data above. It includes unique 
	observations for the following variables:
	  - Title: Article title
	  - Abstract: Article abstract
	  - Authors: Author(s) of article
	  - placeofPublication: City where newspaper is published
	  - pubdate: Date of article publication (month, day, year)
	  - pubtitle: Newspaper title
	  - year: Year of article publication

 Code
    1. 01_load-clean-data.R: Loads, merges, and cleans data in 5 raw 
	ProQuest datasets into Analysis Dataset.
    2. 02_analysis-national.R: Conducts analysis of all data 
	(representing 4 major U.S. cities--NY, LA, DC, Chicago), the 
	results of which appear in the Results directory.
    3. 03_analysis-chicago.R: Conducts analysis of data from Chicago 
	newspapers only, the results of which appear in the Results 
	directory.

 Results
  
  National (All) Newspapers 
    1. FIG1_wordcloud-natltitles.png: Wordcloud visualizing term 
	frequency of article titles in all newspapers.
    2. FIG2_wordcloud-natltitles.png: Wordcloud visualizing term 
	frequency of article titles in all newspapers, with a minimum 
	frequency parameter of 5.
    3. FIG3_wordcloud_abstracts2.png: Wordcloud visualizing term 
	frequency of article abstracts in all newspapers, with more 
	obvious terms removed (e.g., "kitchenette", "apartment") to 
	yield insight into other words used in these article excerpts.
    4. FIG4_bar_natlfreq-bycity.png: Barplot graphing the total 
	number of articles (yielded by "kitchenette" search) by publication 
	city.
    5. FIG5_bar_natlfreq-bypub.png: Barplot graphing the total number 
	of articles by publication title.
    6. FIG6_line_natlfreq-chgtime.png: Lineplot graphing the change over 
	time of article publication by all newspapers, taken 
	collectively.
    7. FIG7_multline_yrlyoutput.png: Lineplot graphing the change over 
	time of article publication by all newspapers, taken 
	individually.
    8. FIG8_multline-point_yrlyoutput.png: Adds points to FIG7 lineplot 
	to make tracking of individual newspaper data more effective.

  Chicago Newspapers
    9. FIG9_wordcloud_chi.png: Wordcloud visualizing term frequency in 
	article titles in Chicago newspapers (Chicago Tribune, Chicago 
	Defender, Daily Defender).
    10. FIG10_line_trib-polarity.png: Lineplot graphing the change in 
	emotional valence of Chicago Tribune articles over the duration 
	of the article publications. (An unclear measurement.)
    11. FIG11_bar_trib-polarity.png: Barplot graphing sentiment/polarity 
	score of Chicago Tribune article titles.
    12. FIG12_highlight_trib-negsent.png: Visualizes sentiment polarity 
	of Chicago Tribune article titles by yielding article title 
	number, polarity score, and highlighted text of title 
	corresponding to negative sentiment(red).
    13. FIG13_highlight_trib-possent.png: Visualizes sentiment polarity 
	of Chicago Tribune article titles by yielding article title 
	number, polarity score, and highlighted text of title 
	correpsonding to positive sentiment (green).
    14. FIG14_bar_def-polarity.png: Barplot graphing sentiment/polarity 
	score of Defender (Chicago Defender and Daily Defender) article 
	titles.
    15. FIG15_highlight_defender-posneg.png: Visualizes sentiment 
	polarity of random sampling of Defender (both Chicago Defender 
	and Daily Defender) article titles by yielding article title 
	number, polarity score, and highlighted text of title 
	corresponding to sentiment (pos- green, neg-red, neutral-none). 


Project Significance

In the 1940s and '50s, the primary housing option for black newcomers to 
Chicago, Illinois from the South were kitchenette apartments. Far from 
the trendy, modern "efficiency" kitchenettes of their white 
counterparts, kitchenette apartments for black migrants to the city were 
overcrowded, dilapidated, and overpriced. What may have once been a 
multi-room apartment for one family was chopped into several one- or 
two-room kitchenette apartments, separated by beaverboard and rented out 
to families at a higher rate than the original whole apartment was 
rented for. Due to redlining practices and housing segregation, black 
residents often had no choice but to dwell in these denigrated domestic 
spaces. 

This project engages with historical newspapers to assess the discussion 
in print media of kitchenette apartments in Chicago and other major U.S. 
cities during the mid-twentieth century. While the project represented 
here begins an analysis of article titles from a sampling of newspaper 
articles of the period, my larger aim is to analyze the actual text of 
the articles, as titles provide very limited insight into the discussion 
of kitchenettes appearing in the newspapers. To achieve this, I will 
need to convert the image PDFs of the articles to searchable-text PDFs 
and use similar code as was generated for the existing project.



More Information

The SentimentR package was (and will be) indispensable to this project, 
although some aspects of the package are a bit buggy. Information on the 
package can be found here: 
https://github.com/trinker/sentimentr#installation

Contact Amani: acm4 at berkeley.edu
